Contents
Introduction.........................................................................................................................1
Section 1: Building an understanding of common terms ................................................2
Online, virtual or digital learning?.......................................................................................2
Blended or hybrid learning?...............................................................................................3
Distance or remote learning?.............................................................................................3
Face-to-face, in-person, on campus or onsite delivery?.....................................................4
Social or physical distancing?............................................................................................5
Section 2: Building a taxonomy of students' digital experience .....................................6
Passive digital engagement/experience.............................................................................6
Supportive digital engagement/experience........................................................................7
Augmented digital engagement/experience.......................................................................8
Interactive digital engagement/experience.........................................................................9
Immersive digital engagement/experience.......................................................................10
Section 3: Building a glossary .........................................................................................11
Acknowledgements ..........................................................................................................17
1
Introduction
Since March 2020, when QAA published its initial guidance on maintaining quality and
standards in the crisis, through to a series of thematic guidance and supporting resources,
our intention has been to support the sector in developing solutions to the unique demands
that the COVID-19 scenario has placed on providers and the sector at large. QAA is now
beginning to look beyond the immediate crisis, to develop guidance with the sector and
support providers in planning for 2020-21 and beyond. Our first publication in this third stage
of guidance - Preserving Quality and Standards Through a Time of Rapid Change: UK
Higher Education in 2020-21 - was published on 2 June 2020.
In developing this paper, we have continued our approach of engaging directly with
providers and it is the result of a series of conversations that we have undertaken with senior
colleagues from a broad range of institutions. As a result of COVID-19, most providers have
had to pivot quickly to a greater use of digital approaches to delivery. It was clear in these
discussions that the different approaches, and for some the speed of their adoption, have
highlighted the variety and disparate use of terminology used to describe the digital learning
experience on offer across the sector. The challenge for providers is, therefore, how to
effectively communicate and describe what they will be offering their students in 2020-21
(and beyond) and how they will ensure the quality of this provision.
By producing this document, QAA aims to help UK higher education providers build a
common language to describe digital approaches to programme delivery and support them
in setting students' expectations of their programmes. It looks to define some of the most
common terms that providers use to describe the ways in which they and their students
engage with digital teaching and learning. It also seeks to go further and provide broad
classifications of the type of experience a student can expect when engaging with education
and training programmes that include digital elements ranging from 'passive' to 'immersive'
digital engagement and experiences.
QAA does not intend this document to set out any regulatory requirement for digital
approaches to learning and teaching. Instead, it is designed to support providers to develop
their ways of talking about digital methods of delivery, articulating what students can expect
and therefore better assure themselves that quality and standards are being maintained. It is
intended to be a starting point for a wider conversation about how providers can talk to
themselves, each other and students about these differing methods of delivery, in more
consistent, more easily understood, ways. Following this, QAA will further engage with its
members in order to determine how a common approach to this terminology can be
embedded across the sector and will be looking to work with sector agencies in seeking to
adopt consistent terminologies of digital provision.
2
Section 1: Building an understanding of common terms
While developing this paper, it became apparent that definitions pertaining to digital
education are being used fluidly, often changing depending on context and the audience.
It was also clear that this spectrum of description, when talking about an aspect of digital
education, was not simply different when comparing providers' approaches. Often one term
may be used by staff at a provider when talking to colleagues, a different term (for the same
thing) was used when communicating to colleagues outside of their institutions, and a third
term used when they were communicating with students. The use of these terms may also
have been influenced by organisational policy, the recent proliferation of regulatory or sector
guidance, influential individuals or because of a dislike of other terms relating to the same
thing.
In attempting to move towards a common way to describe how students may engage with
digital education, QAA have discussed the diversity of terms that are being used by
providers to explain what they are offering, and what they plan to offer in the future. The
most common of these we have captured in our glossary table (in section 3). However, there
are some commonly used umbrella terms that required more discussion than a simple
definition. The terms in this section are often used interchangeably but carry with them
connotations, inferences and historical context that are not immediately obvious and can
influence people's understanding of an approach to learning. Providers are using them to
help communicate the different opportunities for learning that they are developing. But the
differing uses of these terms may lead to misunderstandings and suggest to some students
that less desirable opportunities are being described.
Online, virtual or digital learning?
The term online works well as an umbrella term as it is in common use beyond the UK
higher education sector; it focuses on the connectivity of the learning, teaching and support
delivery methods that may be employed by a provider. However, it carries with it the
connotations that all the learning may be web-based, requiring students to use a connected
device in order to access any of the learning, teaching and support activities that are on
offer. There is also the suggestion that online can be considered as happening at a physical
distance from a provider, when students could be detached from onsite classroom learning.
Online is also linked to convenience and a lack of engagement with what may previously
have been a physical, in-person experience (for example, online shopping). Due to these
connotations, online may be viewed as a less desirable option for those students who want a
greater degree of social interaction or to physically engage with teaching, learning and
support activities. Online learning may also be seen as a less desirable option for those
students who have limited access to stable internet access or no access to appropriate
devices on which to interact with their learning.
The term virtual is less widely used in higher education but is again understood beyond
the sector. It avoids issues suffered by online as it is not inextricably linked with being
web-based and therefore does not have the same connotations of being delivered at a
distance from a provider. Virtual often does not denote convenience, instead suggesting that
the level of engagement required compared to a physical experience will be similar but
different. This difference to the physical, real experience, however, is one of the implications
of its use. Some can feel that virtual is linked to artificial, inauthentic, or simply not 'real'
experiences. As such, some providers only refer to virtual learning in a context where virtual
reality technology is involved, to avoid any implication of inauthenticity. Due to these
connotations, virtual may be viewed as a less desirable option for those students who
want to experience an authentic, 'real', higher education experience.
3
The term digital is an umbrella term that is increasing in use in the higher education sector.
It is inextricably linked to the storage of data but has developed as a term to mean involving
or relating to the use of computer technology, exemplified by the use of the terms digital
skills or digital literacy. When compared to analogue, it also has positive connotations for
some as it suggests that things have developed compared to more traditional ways of doing
things. It is widely understood that digital information can be accessed offline and it can be
engaged with in a variety of situations (onsite, or offsite, in-person or remotely). Digital ways
of working are still linked to the storage and use of information, so it also does not carry with
it any suggestion of being inauthentic. Therefore, digital does not seem to have the same
connotations as online or virtual and instead seems to be a more neutral term. Its use,
therefore, could give providers a greater opportunity to go further than just using the term
and articulate what a digital learning approach would look like for their students.
Blended or hybrid learning?
Blended learning and hybrid learning are terms that are used interchangeably by providers
when describing different models of delivery which use a mix of methods to engage students
in learning. Blended is the more commonly used term of the two and is applied in several
different ways to describe different models of delivery and/or student engagement. Hybrid
is not as prevalent in the UK higher education sector. Providers use both to describe
students' engagement with learning that takes place partly in a digital environment (either
onsite or remotely) and partly in-person, onsite.
The proportions of the different types of engagement can vary considerably from programme
to programme and can refer to individual modules or the whole programme being a mix of
approaches. However, as blended has historically been the most prevalent, there is a
greater variety of models of delivery to which this term has been associated. Some
institutions use the term blended, particularly internally, as a generic term for provision that
includes any element of digital learning. Blended is also associated with models of delivery
which require students to engage with timetabled onsite learning activities across the
academic year, in addition to engaging with digital learning activities between these times. It
is also used where there is not a requirement for regular onsite attendance, but there may be
options for students to attend in person should they choose (for example, residential study
weekends).
While hybrid learning is not as prevalent, it has begun to be used by some providers to
describe programmes designed to provide students with a greater degree of choice as to
how they engage with their learning. Where this is the case, programmes have been
designed to be delivered both onsite and remotely, allowing students to move between the
two methods of delivery seamlessly. Students are therefore given agency to construct their
own ways of engaging with these hybrid programmes, defining how much they want to
engage with the onsite or digital learning activities. However, while there may be some
differences in the connotations between the two terms, we have not found any fundamental
difference in what they describe. Therefore, providers should always ensure that there is
clarity in any communication they have with students when using blended or hybrid to
describe the methods of delivery of their programmes. Given the breadth of different models
these terms are used to describe, further information will always be needed to avoid any
potential misunderstandings about what students should expect from their learning.
Distance or remote learning?
Distance learning and remote learning are terms that are used interchangeably by providers
when describing teaching and learning activities. Both describe a method of delivery which
involve activities that happen away from the physical site of a provider with students using 
4
digital means to engage with a programme, rather than having any requirement to visit the
provider. However, both terms have connotations leading to some providers clearly
favouring one over the other as they seek to clearly articulate what they are offering their
students.
Distance learning is a term that was in use before the widespread proliferation of digital
approaches to learning and was initially related to courses delivered by correspondence.
As with face-to-face learning, this term has its root in the communication style that students
adopted to engage with members of staff responsible for delivering the programme by
distance. This connotation has led some providers to use the term remote learning in its
place to, in their opinion, better describe the physical location of a student and not carry any
suggestion as to how students will be communicating with staff. However, remote learning is
treated with caution by other providers as it is seen to classify this method of delivery as
removed from the rest of a providers' programmes and from the provider itself.
The difference in the connotations between the two terms means that there are small
differences, but we have not found any fundamental difference in what they describe.
Instead, we have found that the circumstances in which a provider finds itself have tended to
be the driving force between the use of one term or the other. For instance, distance learning
has been used by some providers to pitch their programmes towards clearly-defined cohorts
of potential students, while other providers have found that this term can be viewed
negatively when being looked at in an international context. We have also found at least
one provider using both to articulate differences in the programmes they offer with distance
learning being used to describe existing programmes and remote learning being used to
refer to those programmes that have pivoted to digital delivery during the COVID-19
situation.
Face-to-face, in-person, on campus or onsite delivery?
Face-to-face delivery of education and training programmes has been in common use for
some time in the higher education sector. It has most often been used to describe an
approach where the delivery of a programme happens at a provider with a staff member
delivering learning and teaching directly to students. Its meaning is inextricably linked to
communication styles and previously allowed a clear distinction to be made between
communication in which individuals could see each other (such as a tutorial) and when they
could not (such as a phone conversation). Given this, the use of the term face-to-face was
used to denote if communication (and therefore delivery of some teaching and learning) was
taking place in person or if it was taking place remotely. However, with the proliferation of
videoconferencing, face-to-face communication can now take place when individuals are
physically close or remote, given that individuals can see each other even if they are at a
distance.
In-person delivery of education and training programmes is a term that is not as widely used
as face-to-face but is being employed by providers to outline how students will be expected
to engage with teaching and learning activities. As it describes the physical position of the
person who will be participating in the activities, it avoids any potential misunderstanding
(regarding where students and staff will be located) that may arise when talking about
face-to-face delivery. However, as with face-to-face, while in-person delivery may be
appropriately used to describe how part of a programme is being delivered, usually it is
not used to describe the delivery of a programme in its entirety.
The term on campus has the same benefit as in person as it clearly articulates where the
learning and teaching activities of a programme will take place, rather than how students and
staff will communicate during these activities. It is a term that can also be used to describe 
5
how a whole programme will be delivered. This means that it can be used to avoid
misunderstandings when certain parts of teaching and learning are directed by staff, but not
delivered by them, in person. However, on campus is most appropriate for providers that
have campus-based sites of delivery. For those providers who do not have a campus, or for
those who have delivery sites outside of a main campus, onsite delivery is more appropriate.
As a term, it is not as widely recognised as the others, but when used appropriately, may
ensure that there are fewer misunderstandings when communicating a type of delivery to
students.
Social or physical distancing?
Social distancing is terminology used by UK governments to describe the requirement for
individuals to maintain a safe distance to avoid catching or spreading coronavirus. While
social distancing is the phrase in most common use in health advice, the connotation of
social distance has impacts for learning and teaching. Learning is, at least in part, a social
experience and that collaboration and the formation of social learning networks should still
be possible and are very much to be encouraged, even if students are not onsite together.
Using the term social distancing, therefore, may create a perception that there is a greater
distancing required than just the physical space between two people.
Physical distancing, similarly, describes the requirement for individuals to maintain a safe
distance from one another. It is not yet as common in its usage as social distancing but is
becoming more recognised within higher education and more widely used. Physical
distancing also does not suffer the same connotation as social distancing as it limits the
perception of the distancing to the physical space. This frees it from any suggestion that staff
or students should distance socially as well as physically.
In the classifications set out below, you should be able to see how we have attempted to use
some of these terms in a consistent way to articulate the types of experiences a student may
have when engaging with different types of digital learning. 
6
Section 2: Building a taxonomy of students' digital experience
Through defining the terms above and in creating the glossary, it is clear that, currently,
there is no easily understood way in which different approaches to digital learning can be
compared. Therefore, providers have understandably struggled to ensure that applicants
are clear about what they should expect from the digital education on offer, and how this
compares to other programmes. This can hinder prospective students' ability to make
informed choices about the programmes to which they would like to apply. In an attempt to
help ameliorate this situation, we have developed broad classifications of digital learning.
Classifying the methods of delivering digital learning and teaching activities is, as
demonstrated above, fraught with challenges given the connotations of some umbrella terms
and the similarity of others. As providers use terms most appropriate to their context, cohorts
and programmes, it was felt that any classification system that focused on methods of
delivery would, inevitably, be suitable only for a proportion of providers. Therefore, the focus
of this classification is on how providers intend their students to engage with digital learning
activities, rather than trying to classify the approaches themselves. In classifying the type of
engagement that students can expect, we hope that providers may be better able to help
students clearly understand and compare different approaches.
This classification does not make any judgement about the quality of learning experience
that students will have. Instead, it attempts to categorise and describe the different student
experiences depending on the type and volume of any digital engagement. In formulating
these classifications, we have taken into account students' engagement with digital
resources, physical location, technology, software, each other and support services. We
accept that in practice, there is a spectrum of experiences between the students having little
or no digital teaching or learning and having a fully immersive experience where all the
teaching and learning is delivered digitally, which do not fit neatly into these five categories.
Passive digital engagement/experience
Where little or no aspect of the learning and teaching activity on offer is designed to be
delivered digitally. Students will not experience any digital aspects of a programme unless
there is a reason for them to seek them out and engage with them on their own terms.
Programme design Learning and teaching activities are designed to be delivered and
engaged with onsite at the provider, emphasising the physical,
in-person aspects of learning. Teaching and learning activities
may make use of digital presentation tools. Assessments are
designed to be undertaken and submitted in an analogue format,
although some digital submission of assessed work may be
permitted.
Resources offered to
students
Little or no digital teaching or learning focused resource will be
offered to students, with most resources provided in analogue
format, onsite. Some programme information, such as handbooks
or regulations may be accessible digitally.
Teaching and
learning approach
Onsite, physical engagement. There will be a focus on lectures
and tutorials delivered onsite possibly involving skills instruction,
or other lab/workshop/studio/performance space sessions. 
7
Technology used to
facilitate modes of
delivery
Usually limited to a provider's website, digital presentation tools
(such as PowerPoint) and readily available software for
communication (for example, Zoom or Teams). A virtual learning
environment may be provided but will primarily be used as a
repository for programme documentation, allowing students to
access this if they choose to.
Provider support
offered to students
Primarily, support is offered to students onsite. Students may be
able to access some support digitally via email, phone or
videoconference.
Personalisation Limited opportunity to personalise engagement with the learning
and teaching. All students will be provided with the same
resources, and teaching is designed to be experienced by a cohort
synchronously.
Supportive digital engagement/experience
Where some of the learning and teaching activities developed by a provider are supported
by digital support materials. Students will primarily experience these activities onsite, at the
provider, but may choose to engage with digital learning resources to support their learning
even though they are not a required part of a programme.
Programme design Learning and teaching activities are designed to be delivered and
engaged with onsite, and supplemented with digital resources.
Assessments are designed to be undertaken and submitted in
analogue format(s), although some digital submission of assessed
work may be permitted.
Resources offered to
students
Digital learning focused resource will be offered to students to
supplement other resources provided onsite. Teaching and
learning materials, such as lecture notes, will often be made
available digitally, usually after the onsite activities have been
delivered. Most programme information, such as handbooks or
regulations will be accessible digitally.
Teaching and
learning approach
There will be an emphasis on lectures and tutorials delivered
onsite, possibly involving skills instruction, or other
lab/workshop/studio/performance space sessions. These may be
supplemented by video sessions or the use of lecture capture
technology to allow students to engage with this learning digitally.
Technology used to
facilitate delivery
An expectation that digital presentation tools will be used as well
as readily available software for communication. A virtual learning
environment will be provided and there will be greater
engagement with staff and between students using either the
virtual learning environment or other platforms. There will also be
a repository for programme support documentation and other
digital resources designed to support teaching and learning
activities.
8
Provider support
offered to students
Support is likely to be offered to students onsite but supplemented
with digital support mechanisms. Students may be able to access
similar support digitally via email, phone or videoconference.
Personalisation Some opportunities to personalise engagement with the learning
may be offered. Often this will be through engagement with
support materials. All students may be offered the same access to
any digital support materials but will be able to choose how, and
the extent to which, they want to access it. Teaching is likely to be
designed to be experienced by a cohort synchronously.
Augmented digital engagement/experience
Where learning and teaching activities developed by a provider are designed with digital
learning aspects as a core part of the engagement, intended to enhance students'
experience of onsite learning. Students will be required to engage with digital aspects of
learning but can choose the extent of their engagement depending on subject and type of
digital learning activity.
Programme design Learning and teaching activities are designed to be delivered and
engaged with onsite, with digital activities being included as
integral parts of these activities. Assessments are designed to be
both undertaken and submitted in either digital or analogue format,
with some digital approaches to marking being designed.
Resources offered to
students
Most digital teaching or learning focused resource will be offered
to students with only some designed to be offered only onsite.
Most teaching and learning materials, such as lecture notes, will
be made available digitally. All programme information, such as
handbooks or regulations will be accessible digitally.
Teaching and
learning approach
While the bulk of teaching and learning will take place onsite,
some will have digital elements or be delivered entirely digitally.
Any skills instruction, or other lab/workshop/studio/performance
space sessions will usually be delivered onsite, with a blend of
digital and onsite delivery of lectures, tutorials and seminars.
Lecture capture technology is likely to be used to allow students to
determine how, and when, they want to engage with some
learning and teaching activities.
Technology used to
facilitate delivery
Advanced digital presentation tools (requiring student
involvement) are likely to be used as well as readily available or
bespoke software for communication between staff or students.
A virtual learning environment will have been designed to facilitate
digital teaching and learning activities, potentially hosting the
software that enables students to engage with staff and each
other. While there will be access to a repository of digital
information, students will be encouraged to engage with the digital
tools available when undertaking most of their teaching and
learning activities. The platforms used to support these activities
will enable personalisation of the student experience. Where
appropriate, specialist software and platforms will be offered to
students to enable them to further engage with their learning. 
9
Provider support
offered to students
Support is likely to be offered to students onsite but similar support
may be offered digitally. Students may be offered follow-up digital
support after engaging initially onsite. Digital support may be
offered when onsite support is not available.
Personalisation Students may be offered a number of ways to personalise their
engagement with the learning and teaching. All students will be
offered access to the same digital resources, but they may be able
to choose how, and the extent to which, they want to access it.
Teaching is mainly designed to be experienced by a cohort
synchronously, but activities are designed to allow asynchronous
engagement.
Interactive digital engagement/experience
Where digital learning and teaching activities are designed by a provider as the primary way
in which students will engage, both with the programme and with each other. Students will
be required to be actively engaged with these digital activities and will have less choice
about this engagement. Some learning and teaching may be available onsite, at a provider,
but this will not be a required part of a programme.
Programme design Learning and teaching activities are likely to be designed to use
both digital and onsite delivery, allowing a seamless transition
between the two. The majority of the teaching and learning
resources offered to students is likely to be digital with some
available onsite. This could be supported by some optional
attendance onsite.
Resources offered
to students
Analogue teaching or learning focused resource will be offered to
students only to supplement other digital resources. Teaching and
learning materials, such as lecture notes, will only be made
available digitally, usually after the digital activities have been
delivered. Most programme information, such as handbooks or
regulations, will only be accessible digitally.
Teaching and
learning approach
Teaching and learning is likely to be delivered almost exclusively
digitally. There will be an emphasis on lectures and tutorials
delivered digitally, with skills instruction conducted via
videoconference. Some limited lab/workshop/studio/performance
space sessions may be offered onsite at the provider. These may
be supplemented by other, less formal onsite activities to allow
students to engage with their cohort or staff in person.
Technology used to
facilitate delivery
A fully integrated use of a virtual learning environment that will form
students' main point of engagement with teaching and learning
activities and the rest of their cohort. Specialist software and
platforms will be offered to students to enable them to further
engage with their learning, should they want to.
Provider support
offered to students
Primarily, support is offered to students digitally. Students may be
able to access some support onsite, but usually by appointment
only.
10
Personalisation Personalisation is extensive with each student having part of their
engagement with teaching and learning designed to meet their
expectations. While all digital information and resources will be
available to students, not all students will engage with those
resources in the same way, or at the same time. Teaching is
designed to be experienced by a cohort asynchronously, but with
the option to engage in some synchronous elements.
Immersive digital engagement/experience
Where digital learning and teaching activities are designed by a provider as the only way in
which students will engage, both with the programme and with each other. Students will be
required to engage with all the digital activities and will not be offered the opportunity to
engage with learning and teaching activities onsite at the provider.
Programme design Learning and teaching activities are designed to be engaged with
digitally, emphasising the personal experience in learning.
Teaching and learning activities are only offered digitally with
students expected to access digital resources to supplement these
activities. Assessments are designed to be undertaken, submitted
and marked digitally.
Resources offered
to students
Little or no onsite teaching or learning focused resource offered to
students, with most resources provided digitally. Some analogue
programme information, such as handbooks or regulations may be
accessible onsite.
Teaching and
learning approach
Digital engagement. There will be a focus on lectures and tutorials
delivered digitally, possibly involving digital skills instruction
(overseen by experts remote from the provider), or other
lab/workshop/studio/performance space sessions, conducted via
videoconference.
Technology used to
facilitate modes of
delivery
It is likely that a fully integrated use of a virtual learning
environment will form students' only point of engagement with
teaching and learning activities and the rest of their cohort.
Specialist software and platforms will be provided to students to
enable them to further engage with their learning.
Support provided to
students
Support is likely to be offered to students digitally through the
virtual learning environment, email, phone, videoconference or
chat. Students may be able to request some onsite support but this
may not be delivered by staff or at the site of the provider.
Personalisation The entire learning experience is designed to be personalised by
the student. Students will determine how they engage with every
aspect of teaching and learning to meet their expectations. While
all digital resources will be available to students, not all students
will engage with those resources in the same way. Teaching is
designed to be experienced by a cohort asynchronously with
students learning at their own pace. 
11
Section 3: Building a glossary
Alongside the discussion of umbrella terms and providing a structure for a classification of
digital learning experiences, we have highlighted a number of associated terms that are
used when communicating what elements of digital learning are being used. These we have
set out below, alongside definitions we have developed through understanding how they are
being used currently in the sector. This is not intended to be an exhaustive list but
demonstrates the variety of terms which are being used and highlights the potential
challenges faced by students when trying to get a clear understanding as to what their
provider is offering them.
Term Usage/definition
Assessment - computer-based An assessment that is conducted using a desktop
computer, laptop, tablet or mobile device. Typically,
the assessment is both delivered and marked by an
algorithm included in the assessment software
loaded on the device. This term can also encompass
automatic online assessment.
Assessment - online An assessment that is conducted using a desktop,
laptop or tablet device that is connected to the
internet. Typically, the assessment is both delivered
and marked by an algorithm included in the
assessment software that is hosted on a remote
server (or alternate device).
Assistive technology A piece of equipment or system that is used to
improve or enhance digital learning access and
capability. This is particularly important to individuals
with disabilities or difficulties in engaging with digital
approaches to learning.
Asynchronous learning Learning that does not occur in the same place or at
the same time for a whole cohort. Students can
access resources and communicate at any time and
are not restricted to accessing this learning at any
specific time. Enables students to learn at their own
pace in their own time.
Augmented reality (AR) Augmented reality is a process that overlays digital
learning or teaching content onto the physical world.
This term can also encompass mixed reality or MR.
Bring your own device A term used to describe where students use their
own devices to access digital resources to support
learning activity.
Cloud-based hosting Cloud-based hosting is the process of outsourcing an
organisation's computing and storage resources to a
remote service provider. Some or all of the resources
required to deliver a programme can be stored and
accessed by staff and students via the cloud using
appropriate software and devices. Multiple users can
access these resources at any one time. 
12
Collaborative digital learning An educational approach to learning that involves
groups of learners working together, via digital
means, to complete a task.
Content curation Selecting, assembling, categorising and commenting
on digital information for a particular purpose.
Content library A content library is similar to a traditional library and
is a digital store of folders and files which can be
accessed by authorised users.
Content management system A content management system is an application that
is used to consistently manage content (for example,
documents, images, videos) and allow multiple
contributors to create, edit and publish content.
Digital access The ability to participate in learning through digital
means. This includes providing appropriate hardware
and software to facilitate access to digital learning.
Digital assessment Assessment activities that involve students digitally
creating, submitting or completing work. Staff review
this work and then either assess it using digital or
analogue means to assess the work. Examples
include digital examinations, plagiarism-detection
software, virtual reality simulations, video
performances or digital portfolios.
Digital cheating Cheating is any action which is intended to enable a
student to achieve an unfair academic advantage or
to assist another student to do so. This includes, for
example, plagiarism, collusion, use of 'contract
cheating' services, examination cheating (for
example, through accessing unauthorised materials
in an exam), or falsification of research data. Digital
cheating is cheating which occurs in a digital
environment. Some forms of cheating may be more
likely to occur in a digital environment where digital
mechanisms may make them more easily accessible,
although conversely digital mechanisms are used to
assist in detecting cheating (for example, through
anti-plagiarism software and digital proctoring).
Digital learning objects Modular or discrete units of learning designed for
digital delivery.
Digital literacy An individual's ability to use digital information and
relevant technologies to find, evaluate, create and
communicate information. This type of literacy
requires cognitive and technical skills. 
13
Digital poverty The recognition that some students have less or
inferior access to devices by which to engage with
digital approaches to learning. This also extends to a
lack of access to an internet connection with little or
no bandwidth which would negatively impact the
quality of their digital learning experience.
Digital proctoring A term to describe a form of invigilation for digital
examinations. This can be done through the use of
artificial intelligence (for instance, using face or voice
recognition) or through using staff to proctor via a
real-time video link. This can encompass the term
online proctoring.
Discussion board A more formal digital communications space or
platform where students (and staff) can discuss and
share elements of their programme. The Board could
be specific to a module or programme or a
community of students. Discussion boards are often
highly structured around a topic and can be closely
moderated to ensure that discussions are
appropriate to that topic. Also see discussion forum.
Discussion forum A less formal digital communication space which can
be used to engage students in a wider discussion on
a number of topics or subjects. Often forums are less
structured than discussion boards but require similar
moderation to ensure that discussions remain
appropriate. Also see discussion board.
E-book A virtual book acquired digitally as an alternative to a
physical book. This is usually accessed digitally
through virtual or digital libraries and portals.
E-portfolio Where students are required to develop a body of
digital work or evidence in order to demonstrate their
skills in a given area, for example, games design or
digital media. As with physical portfolios, e-portfolios
can consist of several different types of evidence
such as documents, reflective logs, images, videos,
websites, blogs.
Flipped learning A pedagogical approach which provides detailed
individual instruction to individual students placing
the onus on them to use digital resources to gain
understanding of content, concepts or theories
related to learning outcomes. This happens outside
of a physical space. Students are then invited into a
virtual or physical space to articulate and discuss
their findings and are guided by teaching staff to
ensure that gaps in knowledge are filled and further
enquiries directed appropriately. This approach is
designed to 'flip' the more didactic approach of
lecture or tutorial-based instruction, followed by a
more flexible approach to articulating what has been
learned and any further enquiry. 
14
Flexible learning Using different modes of study and technologies of
learning to enable students to manage their studies
around other commitments and priorities and
providing freedom of choice for learners of ways and
times to learn, for example, through digital lectures or
evening learning sessions.
Gamification Method of teaching using games principles to
enhance learning and engagement. This often
involves the application of game-design elements
and principles in non-game contexts, for instance, a
set of activities and processes to solve problems by
using or applying the characteristics of game
elements. Often, this manifests as students being
set, and completing, a series of tasks which
contribute to reaching an overall goal. The aim of this
approach is to maximise students' enjoyment and
engagement through capturing their interest and
inspiring them to continue learning.
Guided learning When a student is being taught, supervised or
instructed by an assessor, tutor or another person
who facilitates learning and development. Guided
learning takes place whether both physically - onsite
at a provider - or remotely via digital means.
Mark/grade management system A digital system of managing assessment grades
and delivering marks to students.
Independent study/guided
independent study
Study activity occurring outside lecture, seminar and
other face-to-face activities with the teacher/lecturer.
Usually involves reading and/or research undertaken
by a student without the guidance of a member of
teaching staff.
Learning management system Digital design and delivery platform - usually
accessed using devices - which enables various
methods of teaching and learning delivery to be
used. Through a learning management system, a
provider can use, for example, video or podcasts to
support and enhance digital learning methods.
Lecture capture Where a live lecture is recorded and is uploaded as a
digital video or podcast for students to view, either in
real-time or after the lecture has finished.
Massive open online courses
(MOOCs)
Short digital courses that students complete digitally,
as there is no requirement for any physical
attendance at a provider. They are most often open
to a wide audience and not limited to those students
already registered with an institution. While often
based on learning and teaching delivered as part of a
degree programme, they are not necessarily
component parts of a larger programme and, as
such, students who complete these short courses
often do not receive academic credit. However, some
students, on successful completion of their short 
15
course, may be offered advanced standing for entry
to a programme at the provider offering the MOOC
which does carry academic credit.
Microlearning Small learning activities to demonstrate a specific
skill or focus on a knowledge gap or term.
Mobile learning The use of mobile devices (for example, phones or
tablets) in teaching and learning activity. This term
can encompass more traditional learning activities
(such as reading digital versions of journals) or less
traditional activities such as engaging in virtual
simulations.
Online labs A term to describe ways of replicating activities in
physical labs such as simulations, experiments,
virtual reality field trips and lab casts which connect
staff and students through live streaming.
Offline learning Offline learning takes place when students who are
studying on a digital programme are involved in
learning activity that does not involve digital
engagement, for example, a student producing
non-digital forms of creative work.
Pedagogy first An approach to the development of digital learning in
which the pedagogical approaches to be taken in the
delivery of the programme are placed at the forefront
and regarded as a key driver in the programme
development and design process.
Personalised learning Personalised learning is an educational approach
that aims to customise learning for each student's
strengths, needs, skills and interests. Students can
have a degree of choice in how they learn as
compared to the face-to-face lecture approach.
Platform In the context of e-learning, platform would normally
describe the software infrastructure on which a virtual
learning environment (VLE) is constructed.
Podcast An audio file made available digitally, often a radio
broadcast, which can be downloaded to a device.
Portal A web-based platform that provides a 'front door' for
links to key sources of information. A student portal
might, for example, provide links to a VLE, student
email, learning resources and student support
services.
Screen capture tool and
screencast
Screen capture is software which allows a
screenshot to be taken, annotated and edited.
Screencast is a video recording of the screen on a
person's device so that it can be shared with others.
Audio or written explanatory commentary can be
added. 
16
Social learning Social learning can be used to describe discussion
board or forum participation, as well as any other
groupwork activity that takes place digitally, where
students discuss and learn from each other.
Synchronous learning Learning that takes place with participants all
engaging with material in real time, although not
necessarily in the same place (for example, some
students may participate onsite while others may
participate remotely, both at the same time).
Technology enhanced learning Technology enhanced learning is an overarching
term to describe the use of technology to support
learning, teaching and assessment and to enhance
the student experience. Technology enhanced
learning can support teaching and learning both
onsite and remotely. The term web enhanced
learning is sometimes used synonymously with
technology enhanced learning; although the former
is, by definition, a more focused term relating to all
technology used to support learning while web
enhanced learning focuses on the connectivity and
the use of web-enabled resources.
Vodcast A video file made available digitally, often a video
version of a radio broadcast, which can be
downloaded to a device. This term can also
encompass Vlogs.
Virtual classroom A digital environment provided through a virtual
learning platform, which replicates the physical
classroom in a virtual way, allowing tutors and staff to
communicate, interact and engage synchronously in
teaching and learning activities.
Virtual learning environment (VLE) A platform for supporting learning and teaching
(particularly digital learning) and providing a space
for learning resources. The precise functions and
facility provided by each platform will vary and there
will be options to customise and add packages
depending on needs. In most cases, a VLE will, as a
minimum, provide a repository for documentation (for
example, programme/module information, timetables,
policies and procedures), provide a message facility
and support the submission of assessments and
provision of feedback on assessed work.
Webinar A web-based learning or training activity, usually
interactive, for example, a workshop or seminar.
Webinars take place synchronously using video
conferencing software, with participants taking part
digitally. Webinars may be recorded and made